if I told you that streaming video
online contributes to this would you
believe me watching gaming and gramming
is as polluting as flying even watching
this video makes the same emissions as
two cups of tea so what the thing is a
week's worth of Joe Rogan really starts
to add up
I need to find out the hell watching me
get a many hey could be contributing to
climate change the Internet is using so
much energy that some people are
threatening drastic measures rather
unpleasant things like rationing video
or by the time stormy is a teenager the
Internet may be using a fifth of the
world's electricity that's the same as
the whole of America
how is binging be killing eve killing
the planet newly installed natural gas
pipeline shuts flames into the sky this
is the chance for Homer a streaming
that's me bad like you I relax after a
long day by watching a lot of video but
I'm also a film and TV writer I am
joined in the studio by film critic from
right programmer
yep hello thank you for coming in lately
I've been reviewing lots of films and
shows by streaming companies and they've
got the money to do it too massive
Netflix films both Oscar contenders both
big names big money it's my heart this
man yeah
our internet use has exploded not
another one like most people me and my
flatmates are constantly online if I'm
not watching something upstairs and
someone's playing Fifa downstairs I know
that the Internet is coming through my
router downstairs and it already at the
screen it's coming into my eyeballs but
I don't know how that process is
happening or where that internet is
coming from and I'm really curious to
find out like just how the Internet is
bringing these videos to me here in this
room all the time
video is three quarters of the world's
Internet use we're always being told
about the impact the Internet has on our
lives but I've never thought about how
my drag race habit could be wrecking the
planet
oh hi it's crystal here from RuPaul's
Drag Race UK I thought I'd come along
and explain how the hell watching me get
a mani-pedi could be contributing to
climate change I know
is nothing sacred first you need to
understand how a video even gets to you
let's say oh I don't know you want to
watch a video of me doing a spot of
welding your search shoots out of your
phone traveling through a bunch of
different networks possibly involving a
trip under the ocean to a building
called a data center with videos stored
by the end of this video you'll
basically be a hot nerd then the video
starts traveling back it's exploded into
thousands of pieces each of which
travels down a different print when they
get to your phone they put themselves
into the night order and the video
starts playing quite the journey and
journey for enough energy the internet
is not just in the air it's a bunch of
buildings and wires and that everywhere
even under the sea 99% of the world's
data actually comes underneath the ocean
so that very wet space out there has got
in fact has around 350 s fiber-optic
cables that are connected to all parts
and all continents of the world
so I'm sort of struggling to wrap my
head around what the copper cables
actually look like I'd love to see an
example of what we're standing on top of
luckily I I found one laying on the
beach no actually that would be really
what quite worrying but in reality we
have one that's that's cut away here
they are tiniest so small effectively
the most important part of all of this
are these small tiny strands of glass
fibre that sit into this cable into this
protection that are delivering all of
that data that turns up on YouTube
on your TV screen or the video that you
stream and and is delivered across that
into the landing station thousands of
miles of undersea cables connect us all
but if my episode of drag race wants to
travel along them first they might have
to go through an unassuming building in
an industrial park
doesn't look like much but these little
cables without their protective sheath
and they traveled all the way from the
United States of America taking data and
treble it all the way into this landing
station that we're standing in this
quite noisy landing station and that's
that's taken all data that would be
coming from people using things like
whatsapp or streaming video or online
gaming does this song bring about all
the data centers cables and Wi-Fi
signals to stream it use the same energy
as Chad Guinea Bissau Somalia Sierra
Leone and the Central African Republic
put together in a single year yes Percy
pushing all the videos through the
network uses loads of energy but data
centers user as much power just keeping
the videos ready to go
[Music]
when I'm hearing this or the noise I'm
happy this is running for 24 hours every
day so the power consumption is huge
what we're using so we're trying to make
sure that the servers are running
efficiently by giving them the right
operational temperature then we've got
to get the hot air away as well all of
the power used to spin the server's
non-stop makes data centers really hot
then they need to use more energy to
cool them down otherwise disaster it's
cold very cold but that's the point this
need to keep service cool is why loads
of companies started building their data
centers in cold places but the clouds
can't only be in the Arctic people need
data centers close to them wherever they
are what the servers are and what the
internet is is just a connected world of
data centers yes look at one of the the
old video changer blockbuster rent them
for one night two nights guarantee when
they primarily we forgot to take him
back what our this is a data sensor is
we can now have all of that digitally
stored on servers storage devices so now
you don't need to leave your house you
me there are more titles than what you
have here everything imaginable can be
stored inside these data centers viral
videos pornography notes by my doctor
and even my bank accounts and there's
millions of data centers all over the
world all connected by the network I
know all this talk of servers and data
centers is really confusing that's why
we're more likely to talk about the
cloud the cloud is not somewhere up in
the sky
the claret is not hanging up there the
claret is a physical location like here
the Internet is really just a huge mess
of buildings and cables it's so
complicated it became easier to just
call all this
the clout to see the full picture here I
travel to America where everything's
bigger from beginning to end these
corridors are about five football
pitches long this is the cloud on
steroids
oh wow
so as a brief power analogy if you can
imagine that peach server could power
one house so as you see the number of
servers growing in this data center you
can imagine that this data center could
power an entire city worth of houses
companies used to keep their files in
their office but now there's so much
data it's more efficient for most to
keep it in bus data centers like this
theoretically if Netflix was acquired
how many episodes of the crown could you
imagine would fit one of those servers
sure you could probably store anywhere
between 750 and a thousand episodes of
any Network show on one server remember
those photos of Kim the website they
were published on quadrupled their
service so that all the people clicking
didn't actually break their internet as
our demand for video grows the data
centers grow too they use more and more
power to store these huge files on
constantly spinning service then it's
even more power to keep those servers
cool
take a deep breath
it's only going to get worse new science
and new technology if you go to high
definition basically the number of
pixels the amount of information that
comes across is four to five times as
much and so you can equate that roughly
to being you know potentially four to
five times the amount of energy the
network's having to do more and then the
data center for our way is also having
to do a bit more do we need high
resolution video if you're doing a heart
operation somewhere with remote video
then absolutely yes watching a video on
a phone with most people's average
eyesight absolutely not all these cables
masts and routers make up something
called the network pushing that video of
me across the network burns up serious
amounts of energy charging and running
your laptop or phone uses the same
amount of energy again and you want to
make sure your two-step so you can watch
me go all night and remember those data
centers that are storing my video for
whenever you need it
same amount again three big pots of
energy just to watch little old me get
my nails did got it
[Music]
Matt's datacenter is in a small County
just outside Washington DC which has the
highest concentration of data centers in
the world but to be honest it's not
exactly what I imagined I can't believe
this is a real place I feel like I'm in
a Sylvanian family managed but for
humans but behind these cute houses are
loads of data centers governing energy I
want to meet the brains behind this
operation Brian since Men Marketing &
Communications Manager for Latin County
Economic Development it's that long
enough title we have longer titles we
are the largest data center hub in the
world upwards of 70% of the internet
runs through Loudoun County every single
day you know if you're wearing a Fitbit
watch or you know some sort of
SmartWatch you're actually transmitting
data 24 hours a day the information goes
up into the cloud but the cloud is
actually anchored right here in Loudoun
County Brian could you tell me a little
bit about why there's such a high
concentration of data centers
specifically in this area so it really
started with AOL yeah I just got America
online sounds great listen I can't go to
the game today America Online a new way
to use your computer dial-up for most
Americans was AOL and AOL was based here
AOL was the internet here everyone I
know is on it email
it's the messages there's no better way
to keep in touch you got mail
and it was a magnet it brought in all of
these other companies that wanted to
invest here that brought their workforce
here America online can do all that but
today we have 13 and a half million
square feet of data center space here is
their everyday that's not like this
there where there's not construction I
mean you can hear it so clearly in the
air you can hear kind of the hum of
machinery I mean you can see men on
Reeves since 2008 there has not been a
day not even one in Loudoun County when
there has not been data center
construction going on I need to meet
someone who isn't as optimistic about
all this growth
Oh Alex has worked for most data center
companies in this area right here most
of the residents do Drive Pass you know
pretty clueless as to what what it's
right here it's just so mysterious I
just I'd be secure as if I was a
resident here but I guess I guess you're
just used to it like at this stage yeah
yeah growing up in this area you get
used to a lot have you always cared
about the environment yes since since I
was basically a teenager I've been
environmentally conscious and
politically active and when you know the
world scientists are telling us that we
need to change out the world's energy
infrastructure within 10 to 12 years you
know here's an entire industry in my
backyard that I work within that we can
you know start to make that transition
right here right now
yeah when these were first getting built
out here there was just tons of deer
that were like living right in here and
you would like see these construction
sites kind of like this one up here you
would see like these deer just like
traversing between these construction
sites and you just wanna cry there's one
particular company that's driving this
construction as soon as I was in here
yeah this is the same cluster usually a
cluster is about three buildings
so I had no idea either
but turns out Amazon owns a huge chunk
of the Internet they make way more
profit selling their clouds than they do
from all those electors and one day
deliveries a streaming site like Netflix
they don't have their own networks or
data centers they run other people's
like Amazon's even the BBC stores some
of their stuff in Amazon's Cloud if it
all magically disappears it's Netflix
Amazon Prime and Spotify it would go
down you wouldn't even be able to get an
uber to the cinema because uber works of
Amazon centers - Alex used to work for
Amazon and worries about their growth so
what is the problem with data subject
the problem with data centers is you
know not their prevalence not exactly
their size it's mostly about the fossil
fuels that power them and most of all
the fossil fuels that power them come
from Dominion energy the energy company
Dominion has a monopoly over electricity
generation in Virginia so these huge
data centers don't have much choice but
to use Dominion energy and this is
important because historically Dominion
hasn't been very green I think it just
comes down to pure profit and what is
more profitable to them and the short
run game I mean and that's essentially
what it is then playing a game with
climate change and you know racing
against the course of time
remember that loads of the world's
internet comes through Loudoun County
with a lot of the energy supplied to
companies like Amazon coming from coal
and gas that means the internet is doing
some serious polluting
[Music]
this is one of Dominions coal powered
stations which helps to fuel all those
data centers I've seen it's just
billowing steam
[Music]
I'm almost speechless like the next time
I'm gonna be thinking about when I'm
like browsing through Netflix or needing
to go into Amazon Prime to stream I'm
just gonna think of this like a really
beautiful but ultimately menacing
ominous like source of power that's just
billowing these constant streams but
she's potentially even fueling you
watching me now it's actually ironically
very cinematic but also clearly
incredibly bad for the environment it's
extraordinary
I think I've never got so many
conflicting emotions as to like stunned
by their absolutely beauty of it all and
also you're horrified by the very
immediate very physical implications of
what goes into you charging the internet
which ultimately ends up with me
watching something on the screen
before I flew to Virginia I asked a
minion if there was anyone who could
meet me to help me about their emissions
they were at first but after some
discussion and reviewing schedules it
looks like we won't be able to make this
interview work next week they did tell
me that their goal is to reach fifteen
percent renewable energy generation by
2025 I also asked Amazon for an
interview but again we just learned that
our exec in Virginia can't make this
work this week apologies but it doesn't
look like we'll be able to make an
on-camera interview work this trip
Amazon grabbed headlines last year when
they pledged to go 100% renewable Amazon
CEO Jeff Bezos announces big changes to
reduce the company's carbon footprint
lots of companies like Apple Microsoft
Facebook and Google have pledged to use
fully renewable energy to power their
data centers and Google and Apple say
they have achieved that Mark Zuckerberg
we've committed that every new data
center we build will be powered by a
hundred percent renewable energy when we
start talking about renewable energy for
data centers that's a that's a fantastic
starting point and what's often left out
is the energy that goes into the network
so the data still has to get from the
data center to your phone or your Smart
TV or your games console data centers
have got really efficient and that
stopped energy use spiraling out of
control despite everyone spending so
much time online the biggest impact is
going to be 5g it will launch another
vast avalanche of data use 5g will
generate much more traffic and demand
much more power which is not good for
climate change no if we keep on
streaming everywhere we go and building
endless stuff that's connected to the
Internet data centers will have to keep
growing
I spent my whole journey home thinking
about what I found out in Virginia
before I started making this program I
thought if the Internet as just a not
even a presence really I don't think I
gave it any thought at all and now I
know that there's a huge process by this
use there's new series being released
every week there's new films being
released almost every day and I think
knowing now the environmental
implications of what we're doing of
watching all these hours of video it's
exactly what I need to stop doing that
quite as much is this just going to have
to be how it is well not exactly
there are little things that really do
make a difference if high-definition
video uses four times the energy why
don't we just watch it in standard and
it's important to keep in mind where you
do it - it turns out that you know
streaming a video or doing anything else
takes you know two three to four times
the energy if you're on 3G or 4G
compared to if you're on Wi-Fi so you
know if you have the choice so there may
be watching that video at home as
opposed to during your daily commute
this kind of a better way I always use
YouTube to listen to music while I'm
wandering around doing jobs or talking
to my flatmate I'm definitely not
watching it's just for the song but
because of that video it's using loads
of data this isn't just about the big
digital companies switching to renewable
energy weirdly it's actually about the
companies changing their design things
like Instagram being petitioned to
remove that infinite scroll might be
beneficial for the environment in terms
of energy connect and things like
autoplay and infinite scrolling because
they keep us engaged that keeps the data
flowing which necessarily then keeps the
energy flowing we've all got to change
I think the Internet's got the power to
help us control and reduce climate
change but we need to change some of
their more frivolous behavior before we
get there I've got a three year old and
when he when he's a teenager I would
hope that we'd also kind of think
about oh well laps is this the video
that I really want to stream am I gonna
be here you know in the next five
minutes to actually watch it or it's
just the kind of thing that should
probably just switch off well that's the
end of the video and by now you've used
enough energy to boil two cups of tea
two cups of tea it's almost like you've
got a friend
[Music]
you